Dear Editors of Oxford Bioinformatics, 

Please find enclosed our manuscript entitled "Bringing biological networks to life with ANIMO" by Stefano Schivo and Jetse Scholma et al., which we would like to submit for publication as an original paper in Oxford Bioinformatics.

In this manuscript, we present ANIMO (Analysis of Networks with Interactive MOdelling), a user-friendly approach to model the dynamic behaviour of cellular signal transduction networks. ANIMO is implemented as a plug-in to the network visualization tool Cytoscape. The network dynamic behaviour is expressed by a formal description using Timed Automata. The Cytoscape interface shields the user from the need to acquire familiarity with the formalism, without losing modelling power. Using ANIMO for the modelling of a large, previously described data set resulted in an executable model of signal transduction events. Inspection of in silico time courses resulted in novel, previously unrecognised insights into network interactions. This demonstrated that dynamic modelling of biological pathways can be used for generating testable hypotheses. An introduction to ANIMO is provided in a 3-minute video clip submitted with our manuscript: "Introduction to ANIMO".

Precise knowledge on kinetic reactions and their parameters is often unavailable or very hard to measure. This limits the applicability of precise modelling methods such as those based on Ordinary Differential Equations. Starting from this observation, a recent article by Feiglin et al. in 2012 proposes an approach based on the static analysis of signalling networks, showing that network topology alone is a precious index for network behaviour. The same starting point leads us to propose in our manuscript an abstraction level that allows for precise enough description of the dynamic behaviour of a network, while avoiding to heavily rely on numerical parameters.

The reviews by Przytycka et al. in 2010 (vol. 11, issue 1) and by Secrier & Schneider in 2013 (first published April 12 2013), both in Briefings in Bioinformatics, put a stress on the importance of the concept of time in biological systems and its proper representation. In 2010 O'Donoghue et al. wrote a commentary in Nature Methods pointing out the use of visualization networks for a better understanding of biological data. In addition, they recognize the need for visualizing networks in three dimensions in case of complex data sets. They also point out however, that biologists fail to benefit from these visualization tools because software tools require in-depth understanding of the underlying mathematical formalisms. ANIMO's user-friendliness, together with its ability to model and represent the temporal dynamics of signalling networks, provides an interactive platform for analysis of the dynamic behaviour of biological signalling networks for researchers without a background in maths.

Our manuscript is interesting to the broad audience of Oxford Bioinformatics as it fills the gap between static and dynamic network representations. In addition, ANIMO is useful for the biological community because of its usefulness in storage and transfer of knowledge on signal transduction networks, gaining insight into the dynamic behaviour of signal transduction networks, directing hypothesis-driven research, and performing in silico experiments. This is the first time a user-friendly interactive modelling tool is introduced for which no mathematical insight is necessary. 

We appreciate your consideration of reviewing our manuscript for publication in Oxford Bioinformatics.

Sincerely, on behalf of all co-authors, 
